EASA-Analysebericht - Masterarbeit
Originaldatei: 20151016_A320_9V-TRH.pdf
Analysezeitpunkt: 2025-01-23T12:13:17.862137
Gefundene Schlüsselwörter: 4

Inhaltsanalyse:
Seite 1:
FINAL REPORT
AIRBUS A320, REGISTRATION 9V-TRH
FAN COWL DAMAGE DURING TAKE-OFF
16 October 2015
AIB/AAI/CAS.117
Transport Safety Investigation Bureau
Ministry of Transport
Singapore
11 August 2017

Seite 2:
The Transport Safety Investigation Bureau of Singapore
The Transport Safety Investigation Bureau (TSIB) is the air and marine accidents
and incidents investigation authority in Singapore responsible to the Ministry of
Transport. Its mission is to promote aviation and marine safety through the conduct of
independent and objective investigations into air and marine accidents and incidents.
For aviation related investigation, the TSIB conducts the investigations in
accordance with the Singapore Air Navigation (Investigation of Accidents and Incidents)
Order 2003 and Annex 13 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, which
governs how member States of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
conduct aircraft accident investigations internationally.
In carrying out the investigations, the TSIB will adhere to ICAO’s stated objective,
which is as follows:
“The sole objective of the investigation of an accident or incident shall be the
prevention of accidents and incidents. It is not the purpose of this activity to
apportion blame or liability.”
Accordingly, it is inappropriate that TSIB reports should be used to assign fault or
blame or to determine liability, since neither the safety investigation nor the reporting
process had been undertaken for those purposes.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 1

Seite 3:
CONTENTS
Page
Glossary 3
Synopsis 4
Aircraft Details 4
1 Factual Information 5
1.1 History of the flight 5
1.2 Damage to aircraft 7
1.3 Personnel information 10
1.4 Fan cowl latches 10
1.5 Fan cowl procedures 12
1.6 Simulated night test 14
1.7 Foreign object debris (FOD) detection 16
system
2 Discussion 18
3 Safety Actions 20
4 Safety Recommendations 20
© 2017 Government of Singapore 2

Seite 4:
GLOSSARY
AMM Aircraft maintenance manual
AMSP Aircraft maintenance service provider
ATC Air traffic control
BLO Base Layover
CIC Cabin crew in charge
EASA European Aviation Safety Agency
FO First Officer
FOD Foreign object debris
HOD Hold-open device
IDG Integrated drive generator
LAE Licensed Aircraft Engineer
LGCIU Landing Gear Control Interface Unit
© 2017 Government of Singapore 3

Seite 5:
SYNOPSIS
On 16 October 2015, a TigerAir A320 lost the inboard and outboard fan cowls of
its left engine during take-off from Singapore Changi Airport.
After being informed by the cabin crew of the loss of the left engine fan cowls, the
flight crew levelled the aircraft off at 8,000ft. They checked and noted that all engine
parameters were normal. They then decided to return to Changi Airport.
When landing gears were selected down during the approach to land, a Master
Warning came on, indicating that the left main landing gear was not downlocked. The
approach was discontinued and the flight crew performed the manual gravity extension
procedure but the Master Warning still indicated that the left main landing gear was not
downlocked.
The flight crew declared Mayday and flew a holding pattern to burn fuel and
reduce the aircraft landing weight. Later, the flight crew performed a low fly-past, and
engineers on the ground reported that the left main landing gear appeared to be down.
Subsequently the aircraft landed without incident.
The Transport Safety Investigation Bureau classified this occurrence as a serious
incident.
AIRCRAFT DETAILS
Aircraft type : Airbus A320
Operator : TigerAir
Aircraft registration : 9V-TRH
Numbers/type of engines : 2 x International Aero Engines V2500
Date and time of incident : 16 October 2015, 2047hrs local time
Location of occurrence : During take-off from Singapore Changi Airport
Type of flight : Scheduled passenger flight
Persons on board : 178
© 2017 Government of Singapore 4

Seite 6:
1 FACTUAL INFORMATION
All times used in this report are Singapore times. Singapore time is eight
hours ahead of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).
1.1 History of the flight
1.1.1 On 15 October 2015, the day before the incident, the aircraft had completed
a prior flight and was parked at Bay 702 at Singapore Changi Airport for Base
Layover (BLO) maintenance. The BLO involved a BLO technician checking
the oil level of the integrated drive generator (IDG) of the left and right
engines. According to the BLO technician, he checked the right engine IDG
first. He lifted the outboard fan cowl on the IDG side to visually sight the oil
level before closing it. He proceeded to check the left engine. He closed the
fan cowls of the left engine and fastened the latches of the fan cowls after
checking the IDGs. He said he was not interrupted while closing the fan
cowls.
1.1.2 Before signing off the BLO technician’s work, the Licensed Aircraft Engineer
(LAE) in charge of the BLO performed a walkaround check. As part of the
walkaround, the LAE looked at the sides of the fan cowl, he checked that
there were no gaps between the surfaces of the fan cowl and the engine
nacelle which, from his experience, would indicate an unfastened fan cowl
condition. He mentioned that he would normally also squat down and extend
his hand to reach under the fan cowl to feel if the latches were secured.
However, he did not do so this time. The BLO LAE ended his walkaround
check at the front of the aircraft near the nose landing gear. According to the
BLO LAE, while in a squatting position at the front of the aircraft, he
inspected visually the engines from his position and he did not notice any
protrusion of unfastened latches (see paragraph 1.4).
1.1.3 The BLO was completed by 0300hrs on 16 October 2015 and the aircraft
remained at Bay 702 until its next flight.
1.1.4 At 1900hrs, the aircraft was towed to the departure gate to prepare for
passenger boarding. The aircraft arrived at the departure gate at 1925hrs.
The flight crew was already waiting at the gate and boarded the aircraft when
it arrived. The aircraft was scheduled to depart at 2010hrs.
1.1.5 The Departure LAE in charge of the departure check arrived at 1940hrs,
having just completed a departure job at another gate. The Departure LAE
performed a walkaround check prior to releasing the aircraft for departure.
According to the Departure LAE, he did not squat to sight the condition of the
fan cowl latches. He said that he observed the engines from the nose wheel
location and did not notice any protrusions at the bottom of the fan cowl
which he said would indicate unfastened latches.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 5

Seite 7:
1.1.6 During preparation for departure, the First Officer (FO) said he performed a
walkaround check as required by company procedures. He visually
inspected the engines from two positions (from the main landing gear1 and
from the outboard side of the engine). Accordingly to the FO, he stood at
these positions and looked downwards at the fan cowls but he did not bend
down or squat to check2. He did not notice any latch protrusions. Looking at
the sides of the engine, the FO also checked that the fan cowl surfaces were
flush with that of the engine nacelle and that there was no gap.
1.1.7 The Captain later also decided to perform a walkaround check of the
aircraft3. However, he only had time to look at the front cargo door and aft
cargo hold areas. He did not notice any abnormality in these areas.
1.1.8 The aircraft took off at 2047hrs. During the take-off, the Cabin crew-in-
charge (CIC) was alerted by a passenger that the left engine fan cowl had
fallen off4. The CIC made a visual confirmation and immediately informed the
flight crew through the interphone.
1.1.9 The flight crew checked and noted that all cockpit panel parameters were
normal, although a fault message from the Landing Gear Control Interface
Unit5 (LGCIU) No.2 was received during take-off. The Captain asked the CIC
to reconfirm what she saw. The CIC reported back that the interior of the
engine was visible.
1.1.10 The flight crew levelled the aircraft off in a holding pattern at 8,000ft and the
Captain stepped out of the cockpit to assess the damage. He observed that
the left engine fan cowls were missing and there was no visible damage to
the surrounding wing area. He noted that the right engine fan cowls were
intact.
1.1.11 The Captain returned to the cockpit and he decided to return to Changi
Airport. When the landing gears were selected down during the approach to
land, a Master Warning came on, indicating that the left main landing gear
was not downlocked. The flight crew discontinued the landing, informed Air
Traffic Control (ATC) of the situation and requested to return to holding for
troubleshooting actions.
1 The inspection position at the main landing gear differed from the aircraft manufacturer guidance for exterior
walkaround check.
2 The FO indicated that he was taught during his training not to bend down or squat to check due to risk of possible
injury from sharp edges (e.g. vent pipes on the fan cowl) when standing up.
3 The Captain was not required to do the walkaround check. He checked the front cargo door and aft cargo hold,
proceeding back to the cockpit thereafter.
4 The loss of the fan cowl during take-off was also recorded by a runway camera.
5 The LGCIU has a role in controlling the operation of the landing gears and the landing gear doors. It does this by
sensing the position of the landing gears and the landing gear doors.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 6

Seite 8:
1.1.12 The flight crew cycled the landing gears and performed the manual gravity
extension procedure to extend the landing gears, but the Master Warning
remained on. The flight crew declared Mayday and remained in the holding
pattern to burn off excess fuel to reduce the aircraft landing weight.
1.1.13 Later, the flight crew performed a low fly-past, and engineers on the ground
reported that the left main landing gear appeared to be down. Subsequently
the aircraft landed at 2318hrs without incident. There was no injury to any
person in this incident.
1.2 Damage to aircraft
1.2.1 The left engine’s inboard and outboard fan cowls were missing (see Figure
1).
Figure 1: Loss of inboard and outboard fan cowls
1.2.2 The left engine forward pylon was buckled (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Damage on the engine forward pylon
© 2017 Government of Singapore 7

Seite 9:
1.2.3 Debris of the outboard fan cowl was found on the runway. Figure 3 shows a
reconstruction of the debris.
Figure 3: Reconstructed outboard fan cowl
1.2.4 The inboard fan cowl was recovered from the sea by a passing ship. It was
essentially in one piece (Figure 4). There was a tear across the top near
where the fan cowl was attached to the engine forward pylon. The original
state of the latches (e.g. fastened or unfastened) could not be ascertained as
some degree of latch handling had occurred before the investigation team
received the fan cowl.
Figure 4: Inboard fan cowl
© 2017 Government of Singapore 8

Seite 10:
1.2.5 All the four latches (comprising four hooks at the bottom edge of the inboard
fan cowl and four corresponding keepers at the bottom edge of the outboard
fan cowl) were recovered. Apart from operational wear, no damages were
observed on the four latches (Figure 5).
Latch hooks
Latch keepers
Figure 5: No damage to the hooks and keepers of the latches
1.2.6 Some fan cowl debris had lodged into the left main landing gear door, and
damaged the proximity sensor on the left main landing gear (Figure 6).
Figure 6: (Left) Fan cowl debris wedged into left main landing gear door
(Right) Proximity sensor (blue circle) impacted by fan cowl debris
© 2017 Government of Singapore 9

Seite 11:
1.3 Personnel information
Departure LAE Male
Age 37
Experience in current capacity 6 years
BLO LAE Male
Age 32
Experience in current capacity 6 years
BLO Technician Male
Age 31
Experience in current capacity 1 year 4 months
1.4 Fan cowl latches
1.4.1 For the left engine, each of the four fan cowl latches comprises a handle with
hook end at the bottom edge of the inboard fan cowl and a keeper end at the
bottom edge of the outboard fan cowl.
1.4.2 To fasten the latch, the hook is placed into the keeper and the latch handle is
closed flush with surface (Figure 7).
Hook into keeper
Figure 7: Fastened latch with hook into keeper, and handle closed flush
1.4.3 If the latch is not fastened, the latch handle will protrude from the surface
(Figure 8).
© 2017 Government of Singapore 10

Seite 12:
Figure 8: Protrusions due to unfastened latches
1.4.4 In the afternoon of 16 October 2015, the aircraft operator was conducting an
orientation tour for a group of interns. The interns visited the incident aircraft
at Bay 702 at 1650hrs. Photographs taken by one of the interns showed that
at least three of the four fan cowl latches of the left engine were unfastened
(Figure 9).
Intern's photo #1
Intern's photo #2
Figure 9: Photographs showing unfastened latches on 16 October 2016
© 2017 Government of Singapore 11

Seite 13:
1.4.5 Damage to fan cowls in flight when the fan cowl latches were not fastened
had happened before. The aircraft manufacturer has introduced a
modification for making a hole in the hold-open device (HOD) of the fan
cowls which can receive a dedicated red warning flag tool to make an
unfastened condition of fan cowls more noticeable (Figure 10). This
modification was incorporated on the incident aircraft.
Figure 10: Red warning flag tool in the HOD indicating an unfastened fan cowl
1.5 Fan cowl procedures
1.5.1 The key actions as prescribed in the aircraft maintenance manual (AMM) to
be performed when opening and closing fan cowls were as follows:
(a) Warning notices to be installed in the cockpit prior to working on the fan
cowls
(b) Red warning flag tool to be installed in position on the HOD
(c) Record in the aircraft logbook whenever fan cowls have been opened or
closed
Maintenance personnel were expected to follow the procedures in the
aircraft maintenance manual. However, the AMM did not mention that one
should crouch to check the latches.
1.5.2 The aircraft maintenance service provider (AMSP) issued a Quality Notice on
2 March 2009 to inform its maintenance personnel of the need to bend down
or crouch to confirm fan cowl latches are fastened. The AMSP also issued a
Quality Notice on 11 May 2015 to remind its maintenance personnel of the
need for aircraft logbook recording whenever fan cowls have been opened or
closed and the need for confirming fan cowl latches are fastened. The BLO
technician was not a recipient of the Quality Notices and neither was he
required to read the Quality Notices.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 12

Seite 14:
1.5.3 The BLO technician was not aware that the red warning flag tool had to be
used when the fan cowls were opened. He was not aware of the key actions
for opening and closing fan cowls as described in paragraph 1.5.1 (a)-(c) and
he did not refer to the AMM for the fan cowl opening/closing procedure during
the BLO prior to the incident flight.
1.5.4 There was no aircraft logbook entry recording the opening or closing of the
fan cowls during the BLO before the incident flight. The BLO LAE explained
that his understanding at that time was that the logbook entry was to create
awareness for other maintenance personnel when there was a handover,
and that he did not realise at that time that the intent was to include
awareness to the flight crew as well. The BLO LAE explained that the check
on the oil level of the IDGs of both the left and right engines did not require
any follow-up action and the fan cowls were closed immediately after the oil
level check, and that he did not make a logbook entry as there was no work
performed and there was no issue of a handover to other maintenance
personnel.
1.5.5 The aircraft manufacturer had provided guidance in its Flight Crew
Operations Manual (FCOM) for exterior walkaround check (Figure 11) to be
performed by flight crew or maintenance personnel. The check was to,
among others, ensure that fan cowls are closed and latched before flight.
Each engine must be checked from both the inboard and outboard side of the
nacelle. The guidance did not mention that one should crouch to check the
latches.
Figure 11: Aircraft manufacturer’s instructions on the exterior walkaround check
© 2017 Government of Singapore 13

Seite 15:
1.5.6 The aircraft manufacturer also published an article in its Safety First
Magazine in July 2012 and presented at its forum with operators in March
2014 on the issue of fan cowl loss and the need for crew members
performing the walkaround to follow the correct procedure such as
positioning themselves at both sides of the engine (e.g. inboard and outboard
of the nacelle) and crouching to check that all latches are correctly fastened
and that there is no gap around the cowl. The aircraft manufacturer, in an
Operators Information Transmission (OIT) on 4 May 2015, highlighted to
operators the key actions in the AMM and the information in the Safety First
Magazine.
1.5.7 The operator in this occurrence did not attend the forum in March 2014 but
did receive the forum’s presentation material. It also received the OIT. As of
August 2015, the operator had been using the version of the AMM which
highlights the key actions described in paragraph 1.5.1 (a)-(c).
1.6 Simulated night test
1.6.1 A series of night simulations were conducted to simulate the same night
working condition that was experienced on the early morning of the BLO
maintenance work at Bay 702 and the night departure of the incident flight.
1.6.2 It was observed that, even in night conditions, the airport lighting was
sufficient to illuminate the aircraft and its surrounding.
1.6.3 The aircraft manufacturer’s fan cowl closing procedure required the removal
of the red warning flag tool, the depressing of the HOD to allow the fan cowls
to close fully and finally the fastening of the four latches from rear to front. It
was observed that after depressing the HOD to allow the fan cowls to fully
close and prior to fastening the latches, the fan cowl was relatively flushed at
the interface with the nose cowl. The existing design of the HOD still could
allow the fan cowl to be closed flush at the interface, there was minimal
difference in flushness whether latches were unfastened or fastened (see
Figure 12).
© 2017 Government of Singapore 14

Seite 16:
Fan cowl Nose cowl
Interface
Interface
Figure 12: (Left) Flushness at interface when all latches are not fastened
(Right) Flushness at interface with all latches fastened
1.6.4 With the fan cowls were closed, latches that were unfastened and protruding
could not be seen at certain locations from the engine (particularly when
viewed from a standing position). The curvature of the engine nacelle
obscures the latches even when they are unfastened, making it difficult to
sight the protruding latch handles6.
Figure 13: (Left) Unfastened latches can barely be seen from a distance (side of engine)
(Right) Unfastened latches cannot be seen when standing next to engine
6 It was recommended by the aircraft manufacturer that the personnel performing the inspection should position
themselves at both sides of the engine and crouch to check that all latches are correctly fastened and that there is
no gap around the cowl.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 15

Seite 17:
Figure 14: Unfastened latches cannot be seen at any point from the main
landing gears to the engine
1.6.5 While it might be possible to notice latches that were unfastened from the
front of the aircraft at positions around the nose landing gear (i.e. some
distance away from the engine) (see Figure 15), the silhouette of the engine
drain mast might obscure the protruding latches.
Figure 15: Unfastened latches can barely be seen from the nose landing gear
location
1.7 Foreign object debris (FOD) detection system
1.7.1 FOD constitutes a hazard to aircraft and can cause aircraft damage if not
detected and removed. The aerodrome operator supplemented its daily
runway surface inspections with a FOD detection system to detect the
presence of debris on the runway. The system uses multiple panning
cameras along the stretch of the runway to capture the presence of possible
FOD.
1.7.2 When a suspected FOD is detected, the FOD detection system will alert an
operator on duty. The duty operator will view the image of the suspected
FOD to ascertain if it is really an image of a FOD, and arrange for the FOD’s
removal as necessary.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 16

Seite 18:
1.7.3 After the incident flight took off, the FOD detection system detected the
presence of a FOD on the runway at 2048hrs. However, the limitation of the
image resolution was such that the duty operator interpreted the image as
that of a runway ground light and not a FOD. The FOD detection system
gave four more alerts but the duty operator determined that there was no
FOD.
1.7.4 At 2144hrs, the sixth alert provided a better image and the duty operator
determined that there was a FOD. ATC was alerted and an aerodrome
maintenance vehicle was dispatched to recover the FOD, which turned out to
be fan cowl debris from the incident aircraft.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 17

Seite 19:
2 DISCUSSION
2.1 Fan cowl latches
2.1.1 Evidence shows that at least three of the four latches of the fan cowl of the
left engine were not fastened four hours before the incident aircraft took off.
Detailed inspection on the recovered latches (inboard fan cowl hooks and
outboard fan cowl keepers) showed no damage on the connecting surfaces,
and the damage was solely on the fan cowl structure. This would indicate
that there was no mechanical failure or structural damage on the latch hooks
and keepers, and would suggest that all latches were likely to be unfastened
at the time of take-off.
2.1.2 With fan cowl latches not fastened, the airflow generated during the aircraft’s
flight would tear off the fan cowls.
2.1.3 As mentioned in paragraph 1.1.2, the BLO LAE “checked that there were no
gaps between the surfaces of the fan cowl and the engine nacelle which,
from his experience, would indicate an unfastened fan cowl condition.” And
as mentioned in paragraph 1.1.6, “the FO also checked that the fan cowl
surfaces were flush with that of the engine nacelle and that there was no
gap.” It is not known how such flushness assessment has become an
acceptable way of ascertaining that the fan cowl latches are fastened, in lieu
of bending down or crouching to bring eye level low enough to confirm
latches are fastened. The simulation test (paragraph 1.6.3) showed that a
fan cowl with unfastened latches could still appear flush with the engine
nacelle. Such a flushness assessment is not a method recommended by the
aircraft manufacturer.
2.1.4 The BLO technician was not aware of the key actions to be performed in the
aircraft manufacturer’s instructions for opening and closing fan cowls. The
walkaround procedure adopted by the BLO LAE, the Departure LAE and the
FO differed from the procedure provided by the aircraft manufacturer.
2.1.5 It is also found from the simulation test that, at a distance away from the
engine, the unfastened latches could be difficult to detect as the curvature of
the engine nacelle could obscure the view of the latches.
2.1.6 It is not a reliable method to determine if the fan cowl’s latches had been
fastened properly by trying to judge from a distance whether there are
protrusions of the latches. The lighting condition and the angle of view may
make the judging difficult. The silhouette of the engine drain mast may also
obscure the outline of protruding latches.
2.1.7 In short, a better way to ascertain whether the fan cowl latches are fastened
is to squat down low enough to sight the latches.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 18

Seite 20:
2.1.8 It is noted that, although the aircraft manufacturer has emphasised the need
to bend down or crouch to check that latches are fastened in its Safety First
Magazine, this requirement is not mentioned in the aircraft manufacturer’s
FCOM for exterior walkaround check.
2.2 Master warning
2.2.1 Fragment from the outboard fan cowl impacted the left main landing gear
proximity sensor. The damage to the proximity sensor resulted in the
erroneous Master Warning indicating that landing gear was not downlocked.
2.3 FOD detection system
2.3.1 The resolution of the cameras at the time of the incident did not support
effectively the task of interpreting camera images for the purpose of
ascertaining the presence of FOD.
© 2017 Government of Singapore 19

Seite 21:
3 SAFETY ACTIONS
During the course of the investigation and through discussions with the
investigation team, the following safety actions were initiated by the aircraft
operator, the aircraft maintenance service provider, the aerodrome operator
and the aircraft manufacturer.
3.1 The European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) issued an Airworthiness
Directive (AD 2016-0053) on 14 March 2016 to modify the fan cowls such
that a special key had to be used to unlatch the fan cowls, the key cannot be
removed unless the fan cowl front latch is safely closed.
3.2 Following the incident, the aircraft operator issued a Flight Staff Instruction to
emphasise the requirement for flight crews to bend or squat down when
inspecting latches from either side of the engine.
3.3 The aerodrome operator is currently in the process of upgrading the FOD
detection system to incorporate higher definition cameras, so as to enable
better quality images and more accurate interpretation by the duty operator.
The aerodrome operator expects the upgrading to be completed in
September 2017.
3.4 Following the incident, the AMSP drew again the attention of its maintenance
personnel to the Quality Notices of 2 March 2009 and 11 May 2015 to remind
its maintenance personnel on the need for aircraft logbook recording
whenever fan cowls have been opened or closed and to bend down or
crouch to confirm latches are fastened. It has also re-emphasised the
importance of following the aircraft manufacturer’s instructions for opening
and closing fan cowls during daily briefings with its maintenance personnel.
Regular checks on logbooks are also conducted by the AMSP to ensure
compliance with the Quality Notices.
4 SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS
A safety recommendation is for the purpose of preventive action and shall in
no case create a presumption of blame or liability.
It is recommended that:
4.1 The aircraft operator remind its flight crew personnel that fan cowl flushness
with nacelle is not a reliable method for checking that fan cowl latches are
fastened. [TSIB Recommendation RA-2017-028]
© 2017 Government of Singapore 20

Seite 22:
4.2 The aircraft maintenance service provider remind its maintenance personnel
that fan cowl flushness with nacelle is not a reliable method for checking that
fan cowl latches are fastened. [TSIB Recommendation RA-2017-029]
4.3 The aircraft manufacturer emphasise, in its maintenance documentation on
exterior walkaround check, the need for inspection personnel to bend down
or crouch to bring eye level low enough to confirm latches are fastened.
[TSIB Recommendation RA-2017-030]
© 2017 Government of Singapore 21
